For one hypothetical Steamboat Springs,
Colorado resident, today is a very
exciting day. After a decade of steady
career advancement and saving, after
years of driving a used car acquired
after college, and after months of
research, this northern Coloradan is set
to buy their first new car. A car that's
upscale, capable in the mountains, and
has the capacity to carry friends to a
hiking trailhead or possibly haul a
budding family in the coming years.
They've settled on an Audi Q3. But now
comes the hard part, or more
specifically, the overly complicated,
often misleading, always expensive part:
actually buying the car from a
dealership. First, there's the matter of
finding an authorized dealership.
Colorado as a state only has seven Audi
dealerships, and the western side,
dotted with wealthy mountain towns and
anchored by population center of over
150,000,
is served by just one: Audi Glenwood
Springs. It's the closest option, and it
happens to have a couple of Q3s on the
lot, according to its website, so our
buyer opts for here. They've secured a
ride down to the dealership more than
two hours away. They've read up on how
to navigate their interactions with the
sales team and financing manager, and
they've drawn up the number they're
willing to pay. But there's also what
they haven't considered. There's the
fact that not only are they opting to
likely buy from this dealership, but
that they're also entering into a de
facto long-term customer relationship
with them. That they're likely to get
their car serviced here for the next 10
years. That the salesperson is likely to
send them a holiday card and ask about
future upgrades or more purchases for
the family. The buyer's car business for
the life of the car is likely going to
be tethered to this dealership, and our
buyer doesn't actually even know who
owns [music] the dealership. Audi
Glenwood Springs, for its part, really
looks like it'd be owned by Audi, as its
interior, exterior, even its website,
all communicate the same upscale
minimalism of the car company. But this
dealership isn't owned by Audi, because
in Colorado, and in the other 49 US
states, that much is illegal. Rather,
this dealership is owned and operated by
Sonic Automotive, the same company that
owns the Land Rover and Volkswagen
dealerships in town. Sonic isn't local,
though. It's a growing car dealership
operator headquartered in North Carolina
that has become a Fortune 500 company
without ever actually manufacturing a
single vehicle. This much would be news
to our buyer. Because of some antiquated
laws, nearly every new car purchase in
the US is made through a franchised
middleman like Sonic Automotive. In a
country where car ownership is so
universal, this puts every car buyer in
a seriously compromised position without
them really knowing it. Globally, this
is fairly unique. While car sales in
North America go almost exclusively
through dealerships, in China, if a
buyer wants to buy a BYD, they just go
to BYD's website. In Japan, while
dealerships do exist, car companies are
allowed to sell directly to consumers.
In the UK, in Germany, and much of the
EU, you can work with car manufacturers
to get the exact color, trim, and
specifications you're looking for,
rather than having your choice limited
to what's left on the lot of a franchise
seller. In the rest of the world, you
have the choice of going through a
dealership or the manufacturer. In the
US, you don't.
Now, at one point, from the perspective
of car buyers and small business owners,
there was some good logic for
dealerships to be protected under state
law. At the beginning of the automotive
age, figuring out how to mass-produce
automobiles while at the same time
selling the public on their necessity
was a major hurdle. Factory production,
no matter how efficient, doesn't matter
if people wouldn't buy the cars. Ford
Motors turned to the franchise
dealership model to keep sales humming.
This allowed the company to stay focused
on its core competency, manufacturing,
while allowing entrepreneurial local
business people who knew the wants and
needs of their towns best [music] to
keep the product turning over. Through
the early 1900s, this model worked.
Americans adopted the automobile as a
necessity, small local dealerships
nationwide thrived, and Detroit's Big
Three became the center of the
automotive manufacturing world. But as
the Big Three crystallized an effective
oligopoly over domestic car
manufacturing, they began to leverage
their largess against the local
mom-and-pop dealerships. If you were to
walk into a Ford dealership in the
1920s, for example, you'd find a copy of
Henry Ford's anti-Semitic propaganda,
The Dearborn Independent, somewhere in
the lobby, not because the dealership's
owner was an anti-Semite, but because
Ford mandated it. In times of financial
difficulty, Ford would keep factory
production high and flood dealerships
with cars they couldn't hope to sell.
And should a dealership get sideways
with the manufacturer, the car company
would either freeze them out, open up a
direct competitor, or license a rival to
begin selling their vehicles across
town. Manufacturers, with little in the
way of competition, bullied the
dealerships. But by mid-century,
dealerships and their friends in elected
positions had conceived of a way to get
back. Laws that mandated and protected
[music] their existence. Even today, car
dealerships tend to be heavily ingrained
in their communities. In Glenwood
Springs, for example, the Ford
dealership sponsors high school golf
tournaments [music] and the Toyota
dealership sponsors the football games.
At mid-century, this influence and
visibility of the local dealership was
at an absolute peak. The interstate
system, the drive-thru and drive-in, the
post-war [music] consumer boom, all made
for record auto production and sales in
the 1950s, and at the center of it was
the town's local car dealerships.
Dealerships were pillars of the
community, their owners were local
celebrities, and the sales tax they
brought in was critical for state and
local governments. They had sway, and as
the Big Three manufacturers toyed with
them, they responded by using their
local importance to lobby for some
protections. Soon, all 50 states had
some form of legal bans on manufacturers
selling their own [music] cars in states
with already established franchise
dealerships. Now, Ford couldn't simply
open up their own showroom down the
block to put a company that sold Fords
for decades out of business.
>> [music]
>> In each state, the exact rules vary.
Certain states have added further
protections. In Colorado, for years this
law was pretty cut and dry. No
manufacturer shall own, operate, or
control any motor vehicle dealer or used
motor vehicle dealer in Colorado. And
while these mid-century laws remain, the
car landscape [music] has flipped on its
head. The arrival of foreign-made cars
has undercut the Big Three's oligopoly,
while consolidation is eating up the
dealerships. Along with Sonic, all of
these car dealerships are Fortune 500
companies, too, meaning there are more
massive [music] car dealership companies
than car manufacturing companies. Aided
by legal protections from a bygone era
and dealing with less and less
competition just means more leverage for
the middleman dealership, and they use
it.
While our buyer is prepared, once
they've stepped on the lot of Audi
Glenwood Springs, they're now navigating
a pretty hostile environment from the
perspective of the customer's wallet.
First, it's confusing. Cars are
inherently complicated, so our buyer is
at a knowledge disadvantage. Next, our
buyer [music] has to navigate a host of
separate motives. Because while the
manufacturer just wants the sale near
MSRP, the dealership's in the business
of resale, and for that to be
profitable, they need to do some
upselling, upgrading, or favorable
financing.
But even before these conversations
begin with the salesperson, our buyer is
already losing just on baseline MSRP.
They've decided going in that they want
to get this Q3 at sticker price. Well,
at $48,170,
that's already more than $4,400
more than the reported invoice cost, or
what the manufacturer sold it to the
dealership for. This number includes a
destination fee that the seller isn't
likely to haggle over. So, while you
can't custom order this car from the
manufacturer to ensure you have the
exact color or trim you want, you are
still paying for the shipping and
handling of a car you didn't really get
to choose. Our buyer is happy with
white, though, and willing to stomach
MSRP. Now there's the dealer handling
fees for another $500 which in a
business is usually just understood as
payment for all the paperwork that the
customer is expected to adjust accept as
part of purchase. But at least according
to Mountain States Toyota, a dealership
also owned by Sonic but one that proudly
weighs all dealer fees, these are
nothing more than additional profit
generators for the dealership. After a
positive test drive, our buyer has
agreed with the salesperson that they're
willing to pay sticker price so long as
the dealership fee is waived. They feel
pretty good about themselves, but so too
does the dealership. To this point of
the transaction, the dealership has come
out positive on what they call the front
end gross, turning a profit over what
they paid for the car from the
manufacturer. When sales are good, a
dealership hopes to turn 3 to 10% profit
on front end gross, but in bad times
they're okay with selling in the red
here. And that's because of the back end
earnings. Now our buyer is pretty
content with themself as they move from
the desk of the salesperson to the desk
of the finance and insurance manager.
This person, given their title, seems
like a paperwork person and that much is
intentional, but they are absolutely
another salesperson. Here's a job
listing for an F&I manager for Sonic
Automotive at Audi Central Houston. It
requires a lot of experience, it
provides good benefits, and it's a job
that comes with training and even
program schools. It's a job that nets
from 100 to 500,000 dollars and it's the
core of the dealership's business
because it's a major profit source. As
the listing describes, the job is to
sell, to upsell, to add on, to squeeze
every last dollar out of a deal that's
on the finish line. They'll do this
through financing, working the buyer to
as high of an interest rate as they can
stomach, they'll push the add-ons like
extended warranties, gap insurance,
winterization, paint, wheel, and glass
insurance. All are services that could
be helpful, but all are also massively
overpriced within this office. With the
buyer disarmed, with our most
experienced, highest compensated
salesperson on the job, it's through
back-end gross where car dealerships
make their real money. In 2025, Sonic
Automotive announced that their F&I
earnings hit record numbers, netting
gross profits of over $2,500
per unit sold. That's an incredible
amount of profit generated by a part of
the car buying interaction that's
supposed to feel like just tying up
loose ends and getting you out the door.
Our buyer is now finally door, but with
a car that cost $44,000 from Audi to the
dealership, but closer to $56,000 before
taxes for our buyer. A 25% markup. And
should they choose to service the
vehicle through the dealership for the
next 10 years, they'll come to expect a
similar strategy on upselling services
every single time they bring in the
vehicle.
Now, it'd be wrong to identify
dealerships as strictly a shady,
parasitic institution. They provide a
real and valuable service to
manufacturers in pushing their vehicles.
They provide a service to buyers through
location convenience and actually
getting people in these cars and
educating them on the vehicle. Their
lack of competition and strong legal
protections have given them far too much
leeway, though. It's hard to attack this
imbalance of power head-on as the
National Automotive Dealers Association
is a well-established lobby with deep
pockets and states themselves benefit
from the jobs and sales taxes that come
with dealerships. Consumers are
unmotivated to rally opposition to this
system because it's not one they deal
with on the day-to-day. So, it's largely
up to the manufacturers to try to check
this power. In 2021, a frustrated Ford
CEO, Jim Farley, threatened to cut
vehicle allocation to certain
dealerships because the company had
grown so frustrated over dealership
markups. [music] But then, there's what
Tesla did. Today, Tesla has more than
320 showrooms, service centers, and mall
pop-ups spread across the US, all of
which staffed by Tesla employees and
owned by Tesla. This makes the company
far and away the largest automotive
manufacturer in the states to run a
direct-to-consumer sales model. But,
they've had to fight tooth and nail to
establish this network, and still, in
many US [music] states, it's illegal to
buy a Tesla from Tesla within state
borders. Perhaps as bold as the concept
of fully automated driving was Tesla's
push to sell its cars directly to
consumers in the 2010s. Because the
product was so unique in the automotive
space, because the company is tasked
with more education about their product,
and because EVs just don't fit the
standard car dealership model very
cleanly, given how different they are
from any other product and how
dissimilar their maintenance
requirements can be, Tesla has always
viewed dealerships as a hurdle to their
success. So, they challenged franchise
dealership laws at the state level.
In many [music] states, Tesla could
argue that it was not actually competing
against any franchise locations because
Tesla had never actually established
Tesla franchises [music] at any point to
begin with. In the 2010s, Tesla faced
little opposition as it spread across
California, but in other states, the
battle took longer. In Colorado, for
instance, the law broadly banned
manufacturers from selling cars, but if
the manufacturer had no franchises
already running, then it could run
direct-to-consumer sales so long as it
only ran one location. That meant this
single spot held down all [music] the
state's Tesla sales for a decade. In
Texas, Tesla could open showrooms, but
not actually make sales within the
state. [music] So, someone could come
into the showroom, learn all about the
EV, then figure out an out-of-state
purchase option. In Connecticut, Tesla
could lease, but not sell. In New
Mexico, Tesla couldn't sell, but in both
states, Tesla found loopholes by working
with Native American reservations. After
nearly two decades of fighting in court
and lobbying battles going both
directions, the map looked like this.
Tesla can sell direct-to-consumer in all
these states, but not in these. But, the
growing popularity of EVs and the
arrival of companies like Rivian and
soon Scout are pushing the boundaries of
these franchise laws even further.
Colorado now has six separate Tesla
dealerships because under increasing
pressure from the anticipated arrival of
Rivian, the state revised adding this
clause that so long as the company is
producing EVs and not competing with any
of its own franchise dealerships, is
clear to sell direct to consumer from as
many locations as it pleases.
But dealerships aren't going quietly
into the night. Even in Colorado, where
franchise laws are seemingly getting
undercut one way or another every few
years, Sonic Automotive in 2026 sued the
state after its issuance of a dealership
license over to Scout Motors in 2025.
Sonic is arguing that Scout doesn't plan
to produce strictly EVs, but also
plug-in hybrids as their vehicles have
the option for a small [music]
gas-powered generator to extend range in
a pinch. The company also argues that
Scout's backing by Volkswagen means the
company is in fact competing with an
already established dealership network
within the state. While it remains to be
seen where this court case goes, it
makes it abundantly clear that franchise
dealers aim to continue to fight. An
inertia is perhaps the industry's best
line of defense though. While these laws
were designed to protect small business
and create competition, the competition,
from the perspective of the consumer, is
the worst sort of competition, where the
choice is pared down to a gut feel on
which option is going to rip you off the
least or which you have the most
bargaining leverage over. It's bad for
both the consumer and the manufacturer
when poll data shows that more than 70%
of respondents don't trust dealers to be
honest about pricing [music] and more
than 80% suspect hidden fees and don't
trust the transparency of dealerships
across the board. Protectionism has
created an environment that promotes
maximally [music] squeezing the consumer
and presents as the least bad option.
This is so backwards to the economic
ideals of the US and its freedom of
choice, pro-competition, pro-consumer
stances [music]
that the Federal Trade Commission has
gone so far as to state its stance on
the matter [music] and side with the
adoption of direct-to-consumer sales.
For now, the third-party dealership is
the status quo. It's something that a
consumer begrudgingly accepts as
something they hope to deal with once
every few years. But as EVs continue to
grow in popularity and as awareness of
their alternative model of sales and
servicing spread, a reckoning over
outdated state protections of
third-party dealerships becomes more and
more probable as the legacy
manufacturers begin to lose out to a
cheaper, more transparent,
>> [music]
>> and more approachable alternative.
Of course, it's easy to forget this much
in a car-brained culture like that of
the US, but there is another alternative
that's often far more efficient, far
cheaper, and far more interesting. And
that's public transportation. And look
no further than Jason from Not Just
Bikes' Nebula series Day Pass for proof
that places where you don't need to own
a car actually exists. Exploring some of
the most unique and robust transit
systems the world has to offer [music]
through the experiences of a public
transit superfan and super critic, and
Jason shows an alternative to automotive
obsession while also just providing a
really fun watch blending travel and
infrastructure. Of course, I'm bringing
up this Nebula original less to make a
larger point in this video and more to
bring attention to this video's sponsor,
Nebula. But the thematic connection of
this video and Day Pass really expresses
the value proposition of Nebula. Quite
simply, if you like the content that we
make on this channel or if you like Jet
Lag: The Game, it's more than likely
you're going to really enjoy this
limited series. Nebula, [music] through
originals like this one, offers creators
like us a chance to make things with
bigger scopes, bigger budgets, more
ambitious ideas with less risk aversion
than we do without [music] it. The
proposition to you is that for what we
believe to be an extremely reasonable
rate, we provide you with early ad-free
content or entirely unique content
that's the [music] best, most creative
stuff we can put together. That means
access to stuff like Wendover's first
foray into the comedy world with Abolish
Everything. It means early access to Tom
Scott's return to video making with his
awesome series England, and means access
to Express's travel series Arctic
to Africa.
>> [music]
>> And it means access to more and more as
the continued support from fans only
helps us keep creating a deeper and
deeper catalog. If you haven't given
Nebula a shot yet, I really recommend
you do. It helps us a ton and we're
really confident in the product. Right
now, through the end of the month, you
can get a Nebula annual subscription,
normally $60, for 50% off. That's just
$30, which means that's just $2.50 a
month, which means that's less than a
bus fare or a coffee. Give Nebula a shot
and go get this deal by going to
nebula.tv/wendover
or by following the link in the
description below.